so Sara there's an ingredient I've
noticed that seems to be second or third
on the list this sodium lauryl sulfate
now I use this in the lab and we're
quite cautious about using it it's quite
a strong irritant so what is it doing in
my shampoo the reason that it's in all
these products is that it's very good at
helping oil mix with water that's how
you can clean your hair and your body
but it is quite an aggressive irritant
as you say so prolonged use of prolonged
exposure to SLS can damage your skin SLS
is used in soaps and body washes as well
as shampoo and to find out just how
damaging it is I'm going to leave dilute
SLS on my skin for several days so this
is completely painless but before I
start sarah's testing the rate at which
my skin loses water the good measure of
how healthy it is as a barrier
the water lost from your skin is 9 grams
of water per meter squared per hour 9 is
a level you'd expect for normal healthy
skin we'll repeat this test at the end
of the experiment and if I'm losing more
than 9 grams then it means it's bad news
for my skin okay next we dip a piece of
gauze in SLS cover it and tape it to my
left forearm I'll do this every day for
the next three weeks putting fresh sls
on my left arm at bedtime and leaving it
against my skin overnight three weeks
later I'm back in bath for an expert
opinion from Professor Richard guy I
haven't actually been examining this
very much I've just sort of put on the
stuff at night and left it but looking
at it in the cold light of day it is red
isn't it it's quite red and this looking
quite inflamed and scaly how damaged do
you think it is there let's make another
measurement shall we so if you can just
hold it at the start of our experiment
my water loss rating was 9 straight away
I can see it's now much higher so my
skin is losing more water this number is
going really through the roof is now
it's much much higher yeah if we were to
remove completely the barrier layer of
your skin the value would be somewhere
around 80 so you've gone up to 33 nearly
there so I am halfway to having the top
layer of my skin completely peeled off
that's great yeah why essentially given
myself expert here it looks like ex-mate
feels like expert we've done experiments
exactly like you've performed in
yourself and in a much bigger cohort of
individuals and we've seen exactly the
same types of things and so to the
second part of our washing cycle after
using harsh detergents our skin can feel
and so we put on moisturizers but what
are they doing time for my other arm to
get some action I'm gonna do another
experiment on my right forearm I'm gonna
use a very normal
widely available moisturizing cream I'm
gonna moisturize just the top bit of
this right arm here I'm not going to
moisturize the bit near my wrist I'm
repeating this routine for three weeks
now I'd expect a moisturizer to make my
skin moister
in other words my skin should be losing
less water where I've put the cream but
in fact the figures for the skin I
moisturize and the skin I didn't are
almost exactly the same
you